IN America we are not accustomed to look to performances of the ballet, which, after all, is not an institution with us, for musical
manna. There have doubtless been ballets given here With music by composers Whose names occur in Grove’s Dictionary, sometimes performed by a fairly good band, but we have not expected, or re- ceived, revelations on these occasions. Since the Russian Ballet (the organization directed by Serge de Diaghilew) has travelled to and fro in Europe, Paris, and more especially London, have learned a thing or two in this respect. For much of the most interesting of the modern music has been brought to these cities by the Russians, Who in- clude not only ballet but also opera in their re’per- toire. They are responsible for the productions, outside of Russia, of Moussorgsky’s two operas, Boris Godunow and La Khovcmchz'na (this latter music-drama was not produced by the Imperial Theatres in Russia until over twenty years after its PUbll'Catl'On in the Rimsky—Korsakow version. Its presentation at Moscow took place after its Paris and London performances, and at Petrograd

only a month or so before!); Rimsky-Korsakow’s operas, Ivan the Terrible, A Night in May, and The Golden Cock; and Borodine’s Prm'ce Igor. As for ballets, Richard Strauss wrote The Legend of Joseph for these dancers; Maurice Ravel, Daph- nis' et Chloe"; Debussy, Jeuw; Reynaldo Hahn, Le Die'u Bleu; Paul Dukas, La Pe’ri (to be sure, this work was finally produced under other auspices; withdrawn by the composer from the Russians a few days before the date set for the first perform- ance, on the ground that insufficient time had been allotted for rehearsals); and Tcherepnine, Nar- cisse and Le Pavilion d’Armide; but most important of all are the three ballets (and the lyric drama) contributed by Igor Strawinsky, who has, in a medium out of the orches- tra by writing a new language for it, although it may be plainly seen that he is the logical descend- ant of the really Russian composers (brushing aside the Tschaikowsky—Rubinstein interlude; na- tionalism was, of course, no object with these mu- sicians). There are suggestions of Strawinsky’s style so far back as Glinka, in the Oriental dances of Russlan and Luidmilla. You will find the germs of his methodin Borodine’s symphonies; from

Moussorgsky to Stravinsky is but a step, espe- cially if you refer to the original text of Boris Go- dunow and not the Rimsky-Korsakow version. In fact, Strawinsky, in spite of his radical departures from academic methods, is the inevitable defender of the faith of the famous “Five” whose slogan was “Nationalism and Truth.” As all real prog- ress in art is dependent, in a measure, on the past, it is necessary to establish this fact. My personal impressions of this young Rus- sian’s music and its effect on me are very strong. I attended the first performance in Paris of Stra- winsky’s anarchistic (against the canons of aca- demic art) ballet, The Sacrifice to the Spring, in which primitive emotions are both depicted and aroused by a dependence on barbarous rhythm, in which melody and harmony, as even so late a com- poser as Richard Strauss understands them, do not enter. A certain part of the audience, thrilled by what it considered a blasphemous attempt to de- stroy music as an art, and swept away with wrath, began very soon after the rise of the curtain to
whistle, to make cat-calls, and to offer audible sug- gestions as to how the performance should pro- ceed. Others of us, who liked the music and felt

that the principles of free speech were at stake, bellowed defiance. It was war over art for the rest of the evening and the orchestra played on unheard, except occasionally when a slight lull oc- curred. The figures on the stage danced in time to music they had to imagine they heard and beau— tifully out of rhythm with the uproar in the audi- torium. I was sitting in a box in which I had rented one seat. Three ladies sat in front of me and a young man occupied the place behind me. He stood up during the course of the ballet to enable himself to see more clearly. The intense excitement under which he was laboring, thanks to the potent force of the music, betrayed itself presently when he began to beat rhythmically on the top of my head with his fists. My emotion was so great that I did not feel the blows for some time. They were perfectly synchronized with the beat of the music. When I did, I turned around. His apology was sincere. We had both been car- ried beyond ourselves. Later, when the public’s attitude had assumed a more formal aspect, I had a better opportunity for studying the score of this ballet. My second personal impression is a memory of

an evening a few nights later, when I attended a performance trouchka.
of Strawinsky’s earlier ballet, Pe- trouchka. Petrouchka is another kind of enter- tainment. It was a success with the public from the beginning, and is still an important feature in the repertoire of the Russian Ballet. It is by Pe- trouchka, in fact, that Strawinsky will be intro- duced to New York by the Russians during the
current season. . The curtains had closed on these pathetic scenes from the Russian carnival. They were drawn back to disclose Karsavina and Nijinsky. Presently a third figure appeared, very thin and short, with a Jewish profile (I do not know, however, that Strawinsky is a Jew). Dragged on the stage by Nijinsky, pale, awkward, and timid, his near-sighted eyes blinded by the footlights, the composer bowed his acknowledg- ments to the applause, nervously fingering his eye- glasses. This account would be incomplete with- out a reference to his dress, as irreproachable in fit and texture as that of Arturo Toscanini. A London experience is also worth the telh'ng. It happened after the first performance there of The Nightingale, a lyric drama to set a pace in the race towards the future. There was a long

intermission after this short opera before the con- tinuation of the bill, which included a performance of The Legend of Joseph, the composer himself conducting, and Steinberg’s Midas. In the foyer I met my friend Alfred Hertz. Those who know
this conductor are familiar with his moods. Tired, after a rehearsal of Parsifal, or excited before the performance of a work which he is about to con- duct for the first time, he becomes distrait and un- conversational to a degree which would not seem possible in a man who ordinarily is as fond of anecdote as he is of Viennese pastry. I recognized his mood on this occasion. Mopping his brow (it was June), he was good enough to explain. “I can’t stay here any longer,” he said. “It’s very embarrassing. Strauss asked me to come. I’m too tired—I am exhausted. I have never heard such extraordinary music. I have never been so moved, so excited fore at the performance of a new opera. . . . Oh, if I could have the privilege of introducing that work to New York, then I should be happy!” I am very glad to quote these words to the last- ing honor of one who realized at once the pleasure 

that Strawinsky’s music, quite in a new mode, would give to the coming generation, and to a few in the present. M. D. Calvocoressi, I believe, had the honor of
signing the first article in English about Strawin- sky, shortly after the production of The Firebird in Paris. Mr. Calvocoressi is to musicians what Mr. George Moore, who introduced Paul Verlaine, Jules Laforgue, and Arthur Rimbaud to English readers, has been to poets—an appreciator of con— temporaries. This is a rare trait, one not pos-
sessed by John Runciman of the “Saturday Re- view” or by several other prominent critics, whose names instantly spring to mind. The initial ar- ticle in English about the young Russian composer appeared in the London “Musical Times” for August 1, 1911. Since then Mr. Calvocoressi has written much on the subject, and a good deal of his information seems to have been gleaned from headquarters, since he quotes Strawinsky freely. (This critic is, of course, particularly interested in Russian music. He translated Balakirew’s songs into French, and wrote a life of Moussorgsky.)
With the words of the composer as a guide, Mr. Calvocoressi has made a most interesting discovery,

that. in the lyric-drama music of thls young man “working—out” plays no part. There is no devel- opment in the music of The Nightingale; the music simply expresses what the text dictates it shall ex- press as it goes along. (In this respect, of course,
Strawinsky is but following an ukase of the “Five” to its logical conclusion; they, in their desire to create a national school, chose as the best means
of banishing any suggestion of Wagner, Whose theories were generally being blindly accepted and adopted by composers of music dramas at this epoch, the banning of the use of the leitmotiv. However, they repeated themes and melodies, and Moussorgsky in Boris brings back the bells that served to ring in Boris’s coronation, in broken
rhythm to ring out his life.) In regard to this matter Strawinsky has put
himself on. record as saying, “I want to suggest neither situations nor emotions, but simply to manifest, to express them. I think there is in What are called ‘impressionist’ methods a certain amount of hypocrisy, or at least a tendency towards vague- ness and ambiguity. That I shun above all things, and that, perhaps, is the reason Why my methods differ as much from those of the impressionists as

they differ from academic conventional methods. Though I often find it extremely hard to do so, I always aim at straightforward expression in its simplest form. I have no use for ‘Working-out’ in dramatic or lyric music. The one essential thing is to feel and to convey one’s feelings.” This, of course, is a more elaborate version of
What Moussorgsky said, “Plain truth, however un- palatable, and nothing more. No half measures; ornamentation is superfluity.” In one of Mr. Calvocoressi’s recent articles about Strawinsky that critic says, in lines which illumi- nate: “According to the modern conception of the lyric drama, the chief quality of dramatic music is terseness—a quality most uncommon in all kinds of music, and which many will, not alto- gether wrongly, think almost incompatible with the very essence of musical art. The principle of music as generally understood appears to be amplification, repetition. At all events, the art of music has always con— sisted chiefly in that of ‘working—out.’ And it is but of late that a number of music-makers and music~expounders have raised an outcry against prolixity and redundance in music: an outcry, it

must be added, that for the present does not find much echo among the majority of art judges nor of the public. “The first of great musicians to abjure the prin- ciple of formal, elaborate ‘working-out’ in drama- tic and lyric music was Moussorgsky. A striking peculiarity of his best songs and of his master- piece, Boris Godunow, is the absolute lack, not only of anything resembling tautology or amplification, per 86, but of all that is not absolutely essential to direct expression (including many devices which no other musician of the time would have dreamt of leaving out), even if the omission of tonal construction and balance. “For instance, the song, The Orphan, ends very dramatically on the suspensive harmony of the dominant. Death’s Lullaby, which depicts a dia- logue between a horror-stricken mother and Death, who comes to take away a child, ends abruptly on the burden of Death’s last utterance, with which the composer’s intention is fulfilled. He never gives a thought to the practice of bringing back the main key which would have led him either to an inappropriate modulation or to a superfluous ad- dition. Similarly, Boris Godunow, in the authen-
